README.md, before:

# MemImg (Forensics project)

Write a tool to visualize the content of a memory dump as a PNG picture. Each pixel represents one page of physical memory, and its color represent if it is associated to the kernel, to a userspace application, or if it is not used. In this last case, maybe two different shades could be used to differentiate pages that contain only zeros from pages that contain data.

## Getting Started

We decided to develop this tool as a Volatility plugin. It has the benefit to take advantage of the numerous already existing functionalities of Volatility for memory dump analysis.

### Prerequisites

Of course, in the aim for this tool to work properly, you need to have or install Volatility and some additional Python libraries.

#### Volatility
The Volatility Framework is a completely open collection of tools,
implemented in Python for the extraction of digital artifacts from volatile memory (RAM) samples.

You will find all the information needed to download and install Volatility [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility/wiki/Installation).

Basically, you have to clone the GitHub repository by issuing the following command in a Terminal:
```
git clone https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility.git
```

#### Python
In order for Volatility to work properly, you need to have Python 2.6 or later (but not Python 3). Moreover, the following additional Python libraries are necessary to run it:
- Pillow
- sys
- math

Ensure to have all these libraries installed on your pc (using pip is the easiest way).


#### Memory dumps
Volatility provides numerous samples of memory dumps [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility/wiki/Memory-Samples) to perform some tests. Mainly, we used the memory samples from **Art of Memory Forensics** book available [here](https://memoryanalysis.net/#!amf/cmg5).


### Downloading the plugin
Clone the project repository on your pc:

```
git clone https://github.com/simondecaestecker/eurecom_forensics_project.git
```

or just download the Python file on your PC.

## How it works
This plugin is inspired by the already built-in **Memmap** plugin.

The memmap command shows you exactly which pages are memory resident. It shows you the virtual address of the page, the corresponding physical offset of the page, and the size of the page. The map information generated by this plugin comes from the underlying address space's get_available_addresses method.

To this information, we add a new information that checks if the current page contains data or not thanks to the **read** function.

Basically, if the memmap plugin does not work on a particular dump file, our plugin will also not work for this dump file.


## Using the tool

### Copy the plugin into Volatility
In order to be able to use this plugin in Volatility, you must move the script file into the plugins folder in the Volatility folder. The path is the following:
```
some_path/volatility/volatility/plugins/
```

### Execute the Volatility plugin

You are now able to launch the plugin. In this purpose, issue the following command in your Terminal:

```
python vol.py -f <path_to_dump_file> --profile=<profile> memimg <options>

```

### Options

You can pass different parameters to the plugin:

| parameter | explanations |
|--|--|
| -K, --kernel | Virtual address of the kernel space limit in hexadecimal |
| -W, --width  | width of the image in pixels  |
| -O, --output_name  | Name of the output image (without the extension)  |
| -F, --output_format   | Output format of the image (png by default). You have the choice between png, jpg, bmp and gif.  |


For example, you can issue the following command:
```
python vol.py -f <path_to_dump_file> --profile=<profile> memimg -W 1000 -F jpg -O picture_dump -K 0x804d7000
```

### If you don't know the profile
If you are not sure of the profile you should use for your dump file, you can run the *kdbgscan* on your dump file. It will allow you to determine what is the best profile for your dump.

**Caution!** It only works for Windows dumps. There is currently no way to determine what is the right profile for Linux dumps. You can find [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility) the list of profiles and supported OS.

## Challenges encountered
The standard partitioning of a memory depends on the OS and the size of the memory. Moreover, it can be customized by users.

Thus, we must find a way to retrieve at what offset the kernel space starts. Volatility provides this functionality through its **kdbgscan** plugin. By running it on your dump file, it gives you (among other useful information) the virtual address of the kernel base.

However, we were not able to directly retrieve this information directly in our plugin. Thus, you must enter the kernel base virtual address using the -K option in order for our plugin to work properly.


## Authors

* **Simon DECAESTECKER** - *Post-Master student* - [GitHub](https://github.com/simondecaestecker)
* **Antoine LEROY SOUQUE** - *Post-Master student* - [GitHub](https://github.com/PurpleBooth)

Commit message:

Adding info about output image in the README

README.md, after:

# MemImg (Forensics project)

Write a tool to visualize the content of a memory dump as a PNG picture. Each pixel represents one page of physical memory, and its color represent if it is associated to the kernel, to a userspace application, or if it is not used. In this last case, maybe two different shades could be used to differentiate pages that contain only zeros from pages that contain data.

## Getting Started

We decided to develop this tool as a Volatility plugin. It has the benefit to take advantage of the numerous already existing functionalities of Volatility for memory dump analysis.

### Prerequisites

Of course, in the aim for this tool to work properly, you need to have or install Volatility and some additional Python libraries.

#### Volatility
The Volatility Framework is a completely open collection of tools,
implemented in Python for the extraction of digital artifacts from volatile memory (RAM) samples.

You will find all the information needed to download and install Volatility [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility/wiki/Installation).

Basically, you have to clone the GitHub repository by issuing the following command in a Terminal:
```
git clone https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility.git
```

#### Python
In order for Volatility to work properly, you need to have Python 2.6 or later (but not Python 3). Moreover, the following additional Python libraries are necessary to run it:
- Pillow
- sys
- math

Ensure to have all these libraries installed on your pc (using pip is the easiest way).


#### Memory dumps
Volatility provides numerous samples of memory dumps [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility/wiki/Memory-Samples) to perform some tests. Mainly, we used the memory samples from **Art of Memory Forensics** book available [here](https://memoryanalysis.net/#!amf/cmg5).


### Downloading the plugin
Clone the project repository on your pc:

```
git clone https://github.com/simondecaestecker/eurecom_forensics_project.git
```

or just download the Python file on your PC.

## How it works
This plugin is inspired by the already built-in **Memmap** plugin.

The memmap command shows you exactly which pages are memory resident. It shows you the virtual address of the page, the corresponding physical offset of the page, and the size of the page. The map information generated by this plugin comes from the underlying address space's get_available_addresses method.

To this information, we add a new information that checks if the current page contains data or not thanks to the **read** function.

Basically, if the memmap plugin does not work on a particular dump file, our plugin will also not work for this dump file.


## Using the tool

### Copy the plugin into Volatility
In order to be able to use this plugin in Volatility, you must move the script file into the plugins folder in the Volatility folder. The path is the following:
```
some_path/volatility/volatility/plugins/
```

### Execute the Volatility plugin

You are now able to launch the plugin. In this purpose, issue the following command in your Terminal:

```
python vol.py -f <path_to_dump_file> --profile=<profile> memimg <options>

```

### Options

You can pass different parameters to the plugin:

| parameter | explanations |
|--|--|
| -K, --kernel | Virtual address of the kernel space limit in hexadecimal |
| -W, --width  | width of the image in pixels  |
| -O, --output_name  | Name of the output image (without the extension)  |
| -F, --output_format   | Output format of the image (png by default). You have the choice between png, jpg, bmp and gif.  |


For example, you can issue the following command:
```
python vol.py -f <path_to_dump_file> --profile=<profile> memimg -W 1000 -F jpg -O picture_dump -K 0x804d7000
```

### If you don't know the profile
If you are not sure of the profile you should use for your dump file, you can run the *kdbgscan* on your dump file. It will allow you to determine what is the best profile for your dump.

**Caution!** It only works for Windows dumps. There is currently no way to determine what is the right profile for Linux dumps. You can find [here](https://github.com/volatilityfoundation/volatility) the list of profiles and supported OS.

### Output image
At the end, an image file will be created regarding the parameters used. Each pixel represents a page of memory. Two colors with two shades each are used: blue and yellow. Blue is used to represent user space pages and yellow is used for kernel space pages. The dark shade represents a page containing data and the clear shade an empty page.

## Challenges encountered
The standard partitioning of a memory depends on the OS and the size of the memory. Moreover, it can be customized by users.

Thus, we must find a way to retrieve at what offset the kernel space starts. Volatility provides this functionality through its **kdbgscan** plugin. By running it on your dump file, it gives you (among other useful information) the virtual address of the kernel base.

However, we were not able to directly retrieve this information directly in our plugin. Thus, you must enter the kernel base virtual address using the -K option in order for our plugin to work properly.


## Authors

* **Simon DECAESTECKER** - *Post-Master student* - [GitHub](https://github.com/simondecaestecker)
* **Antoine LEROY SOUQUE** - *Post-Master student* - [GitHub](https://github.com/PurpleBooth)
